yatneṣu sarveṣvapi nāvakeśī keśī sa bhojeśituriṣṭabandhu: |
tvāṃ sindhujāvāpya itīva matvā samprāptavān sindhujavājirūpa: ||1||
yatneṣu	in (even all his) attempts
sarveṣu-api	all even
na-avakeśī	not unsuccessful
keśī sa	that Keshi
bhoja-īśitu:-	of the Bhoja king (Kansa's)
iṣṭa-bandhu:	a close friend
tvām	Thee
sindhujā-avāpya	by the ocean born Laxmi attainable
iti-iva matvā	thus as if thinking
samprāptavān	approached (Thee)
sindhuja-	(as) born of the Sindhu land
vāji-rūpa:	in horse form
A close friend of the Bhoja king Kansa, Keshi was never unsuccessful in any of his attempts. He took the form of a horse from the land of Sindhu, thinking that Thou were easily accessible to those born off Sindhu (ocean) as Thou are to Laxmi Devi.
gandharvatāmeṣa gato'pi rūkṣairnādai: samudvejitasarvaloka: |
bhavadvilokāvadhi gopavāṭīṃ pramardya pāpa: punarāpatattvām ||2||
gandharvatām-	(though) the form of a Gandharva (celestial singer)
eṣa gata:-api	this (wicked one) assuming even
rūkṣai:-nādai:	by fierce noises (voices)
samudvejita-sarva-loka:	frightening all the worlds
bhavat-viloka-avadhi	Thee sighting until
gopavāṭīṃ pramardya	Gokula destructing
pāpa:	the wicked one
puna:-āpatat-tvām	then attacked Thee
This wicked Asura, even though he had assumed the form of a Gandharva frightened all the worlds with his fierce voices. Until he set sight on Thee, the evil one destructed Gokula and then rushed to attack Thee.
tārkṣyārpitāṅghrestava tārkṣya eṣa cikṣepa vakṣobhuvi nāma pādam |
bhṛgo: padāghātakathāṃ niśamya svenāpi śakyaṃ taditīva mohāt ||3||
tārkṣya-arpita-	on Garuda placed
aṅghre:-tava	feet of Thee
tārkṣya eṣa cikṣepa	horse this, threw (kicked)
vakṣobhuvi	on the chest area
nāma pādam	indeed his foot
bhṛgo: pada-āghāta-	of (sage) Bhrigu, with feet hitting
kathāṃ niśamya	story having heard
svena-api	by himself also
śakyaṃ tat-	could be done that
iti-iva mohāt	thus as if deludedly
Thou, whose feet are placed on Garuda, Thy vehicle, was kicked on the chest by this horse demon by his foot. Perhaps he had heard the story of sage Bhrigu having hit Thee with the foot, he deludedly thought that he too could do so.
pravañcayannasya khurāñcalaṃ drāgamuñca cikṣepitha dūradūram
sammūrcchito'pi hyatimūrcchitena krodhoṣmaṇā khāditumādrutastvām ||4||
pravañcayan-asya	dodging his
khurāñcalaṃ	raised hoofs
drāk-amuṃ-ca	quickly,and him
cikṣepitha	(Thou) flung
dūra-dūram	far far away
sammūrcchita:-api	fainting also
hi-atimūrcchitena	indeed in much great
krodha-uṣmaṇā	rage burning
khāditum-adruta:-	to consume (Thee) rushed
tvām	Thee
Dodging his raised hoofs Thou quickly caught him and flung him far far away. Though he fainted for sometime, with an increased rage as though set afire, he rushed to consume Thee.
tvaṃ vāhadaṇḍe kṛtadhīśca vāhādaṇḍaṃ nyadhāstasya mukhe tadānīm |
tad vṛddhiruddhaśvasano gatāsu: saptībhavannapyayamaikyamāgāt ||5||
tvaṃ	Thou
vāha-daṇḍe	the horse punishing
kṛtadhī:-ca	and deciding
vāhā-daṇḍaṃ	(Thy) arm, club (like)
nyadhā:-tasya	placed into his
mukhe tadānīm	mouth at that time
tad-vṛddhi-	(by) its increasing (in size)
ruddha-śvasana:	(by) choking of breath
gatāsu:	(he) having died
saptībhavan-api-	in a horse form though
ayam-	this (Asura)
aikyam-āgāt	oneness (with Thee) attained
Thou decided to punish the horse, and placed Thy strong club like arm into his mouth. At that time the arm increased in size and choked the horse to death. Even though the Asura was in the form of a horse, he attained oneness with Thee.
ālambhamātreṇa paśo: surāṇāṃ prasādake nūtna ivāśvamedhe |
kṛte tvayā harṣavaśāt surendrāstvāṃ tuṣṭuvu: keśavanāmadheyam ||6||
ālambha-	by killing
mātreṇa paśo:	merely, of the animal
surāṇām prasādake	to the god's pleasure (joy)
nūtna iva-	new as if
aśvamedhe	in the Ashvamedha sacrifice
kṛte tvayā	done by Thee
harṣavaśāt	inspired by joy
surendrā:-tvāṃ	the gods Thee
tuṣṭuvu:	hailed
keśava-nāma-dheyam	Keshava name giving (to Thee)
Merely by the killing of the animal the gods were full of joy. This was as if it were a new Ashvamedha sacrifice done by Thee. Delighted, the gods hailed Thee giving Thee the name Keshava, the killer of Keshi.
kaṃsāya te śaurisutatvamuktvā taṃ tadvadhotkaṃ pratirudhya vācā|
prāptena keśikṣapaṇāvasāne śrīnāradena tvamabhiṣṭuto'bhū: ||7||
kaṃsāya te	to Kansa Thy
śauri-sutatvam-uktvā	Vasudeva"s son having said
taṃ tat-	him (Kansa), his (Vasudeva's)
vadha-utkaṃ	killing eagerness
pratirudhya vācā	dissuading verbally
prāptena	who had come
keśi-kṣapaṇa-avasāne	at the end of Keshi's destruction
śrī-nāradena tvam-	by Shri Naarada, Thou
abhiṣṭuta:-abhū:	were praised
Sage Naarada had told Kansa that Thou were the son of Vasudeva. Kansa eagerly set out to kill Vasudeva but was verbally dissuaded by Shri Naarada to do so. At the end of Keshi's destruction Naarada came to Thee and sung Thy praises.
kadāpi gopai: saha kānanānte nilāyanakrīḍanalolupaṃ tvām |
mayātmaja: prāpa durantamāyo vyomābhidho vyomacaroparodhī ||8||
kadāpi	once
gopai: saha	with the Gopas
kānanānte	in the forest
nilāyana-krīḍana-lolupaṃ	hide and seek game engaged in
tvām	Thee
maya-ātmaja:	Maya's son
prāpa	approached
duranta-māya:	(who had) immense magical powers
vyoma-abhidha:	Vyoma named
vyoma-cara-uparodhī	the gods obstructing
One day Thou were engaged in playing the game of hide and seek with the Gopa boys. Just then the son of Maya, an Asura named Vyoma who had immense magical powers and who was an enemy of the gods, approached Thee.
sa corapālāyitavallaveṣu corāyito gopaśiśūn paśūṃśca
guhāsu kṛtvā pidadhe śilābhistvayā ca buddhvā parimardito'bhūt ||9||
sa	he (Vyoma)
cora-pālāyita-vallaveṣu	among the thieves and the policemen boys
corāyita:	(acting) as a thief
gopa-śiśūn	the Gopa boys
paśūn-ca	and the cows
guhāsu kṛtvā	in a cave doing (putting)
pidadhe śilābhi:-	closed (the caves) with stones
tvayā ca buddhvā	and by Thee, understanding (the situation)
parimardita:-abhūt	killed was
He, in the game, mingled among the boys who were playing as thief and policemen. Vyoma playing as thief put the Gopa boys and the cows in a cave and closed the mouth of the cave with a stone. As Thou understood the situation, Vyoma was killed by Thee.
evaṃ vidhaiścādbhutakelibhedairānandamūrcchāmatulāṃ vrajasya |
pade pade nūtanayannasīmāṃ parātmarūpin pavaneśa pāyā: ||10||
evaṃ vidhai:-ca-	this and such like
adbhuta-	strange
keli-bhedai:-	sports of different kinds
ānanda-mūrcchām-	in bliss swooning (happiness)
atulāṃ vrajasya	extremely of Vraj
pade pade	every now and then
nūtayan-	renewing
asīmāṃ	unlimitedly
paramātmarūpin	O Supreme Being
pavaneśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
pāyā:	protect me
Thou made Vraja swoon in bliss with such strange and different kinds of sports.Thou renewed Thy sports every now and then with unlimited variety. O Supreme Being! O Lord of Guruvaayur! protect me.